New release process (#1438)
PyCQA/astroid: doc/release.md

So, you want to release the `X.Y.Z` version of astroid ?

> ## Release a minor or major version
> 
> 1. Release what was not yet released on the `X.Y-1` branch.
> 2. Remove the empty changelog for the last unreleased patch version `X.Y-1.Z'`.
> 3. Check the result of `git diff vX.Y-1.Z' ChangeLog`.
> 4. Install the release dependencies `pip3 install pre-commit tbump`
> 5. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y.Z --no-push`.
> 6. Check the result visually and then by triggering the "release tests" workflow in
>    GitHub Actions first.
> 7. Push the tag.
> 8. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
>    appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Releasing a major or minor version

**Before releasing a major or minor version check if there are any unreleased commits on the maintenance branch. If so, release a last patch release first. See `Releasing a patch version`.**

1. Install the release dependencies `pip3 install pre-commit tbump`
2. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y.Z --no-push`. (For example: `tbump 2.4.0 --no-push`)
3. Check the result visually and then by triggering the "release tests" workflow in
   GitHub Actions first.
3. Push the tag.
4. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
   appropriate changelog in the description. This triggers the PyPI release.
5. Create a `maintenance/X.Y.x` branch on Github. (For example: `maintenance/2.4.x`)
```

> 9. Move back to a dev version with `tbump`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Move the `main` branch up to a dev version with `tbump`:
```

```bash

> tbump X.Y.Z+1-dev0 --no-tag --no-push # You can interrupt during copyrite

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tbump X.Y+1.0-dev0 --no-tag --no-push # You can interrupt during copyrite
```

So, you want to release the `X.Y.Z` version of astroid ?

## Releasing a major or minor version

**Before releasing a major or minor version check if there are any unreleased commits on
the maintenance branch. If so, release a last patch release first. See

> `Release a patch version`.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Releasing a patch version`.**
```

- Remove the empty changelog for the last unreleased patch version `X.Y-1.Z'`. (For
  example: `v2.3.5`)
- Check the result of `git diff vX.Y-1.Z' ChangeLog`. (For example:
  `git diff v2.3.4 ChangeLog`)
- Install the release dependencies: `pip3 install -r requirements_test.txt`
- Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y.0 --no-push`. (For example:
  `tbump 2.4.0 --no-push`)
- Check the result visually and then by triggering the "release tests" workflow in
  GitHub Actions first.
- Push the tag.
- Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the

>   appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  appropriate changelog in the description. This triggers the PyPI release.
```

## Backporting a fix from `main` to the maintenance branch

Whenever a commit on `main` should be released in a patch release on the current
maintenance branch we cherry-pick the commit from `main`.

- During the merge request on `main`, make sure that the changelog is for the patch
  version `X.Y-1.Z'`. (For example: `v2.3.5`)
- After the PR is merged on `main` cherry-pick the commits on the `maintenance/X.Y.x`
  branch (For example: from `maintenance/2.4.x` cherry-pick a commit from `main`)
- Release a patch version

## Releasing a patch version

We release patch versions when a crash or a bug is fixed on the main branch and has been
cherry-picked on the maintenance branch.

- Check the result of `git diff vX.Y-1.Z-1 ChangeLog`. (For example:
  `git diff v2.3.4 ChangeLog`)
- Install the release dependencies: `pip3 install -r requirements_test.txt`
- Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y-1.Z --no-push`. (For example:
  `tbump 2.3.5 --no-push`)
- Check the result visually and then by triggering the "release tests" workflow in
  GitHub Actions first.
- Push the tag.
- Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the

>   appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  appropriate changelog in the description. This triggers the PyPI release.
```

`Release a patch version`.**

1. Remove the empty changelog for the last unreleased patch version `X.Y-1.Z'`. (For
   example: `v2.3.5`)
2. Check the result of `git diff vX.Y-1.Z' ChangeLog`. (For example:
   `git diff v2.3.4 ChangeLog`)
3. Install the release dependencies: `pip3 install -r requirements_test.txt`
4. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y.0 --no-push`. (For example:
   `tbump 2.4.0 --no-push`)
5. Check the result visually and then by triggering the "release tests" workflow in
   GitHub Actions first.
6. Push the tag.
7. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
   appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.
8. Move the `main` branch up to a dev version with `tbump`:

```bash
tbump X.Y+1.0-dev0 --no-tag --no-push  # You can interrupt after the first step
git commit -am "Upgrade the version to x.y+1.0-dev0 following x.y.0 release"
```

For example:

```bash
tbump 2.5.0-dev0 --no-tag --no-push
git commit -am "Upgrade the version to 2.5.0-dev0 following 2.4.0 release"
```

Check the result and then upgrade the main branch

> 11. Delete the `maintenance/X.Y-1.x` branch. (For example: `maintenance/2.3.x`)

Reviewer: And create a new ......

Author: [f594919](https://github.com/PyCQA/astroid/pull/1438/commits/f59491952604e9690699c74035b917e445025d09)

## Backporting a fix from `main` to the maintenance branch

Whenever a commit on `main` should be released in a patch release on the current
maintenance branch we cherry-pick the commit from `main`.

1. During the merge request on `main`, make sure that the changelog is for the patch
   version `X.Y-1.Z'`. (For example: `v2.3.5`)

> 2. Create a `maintenance/X.Y.x` branch on Github --if it does not already exist-- from

Reviewer: I think it's good to make the `maintenance` branch always as it is also a visual pointer about which versions are still supported.

Author: [f594919](https://github.com/PyCQA/astroid/pull/1438/commits/f59491952604e9690699c74035b917e445025d09)

   the `X.Y-1.0` tag . (For example: `maintenance/2.3.x` from the `v2.3.0` tag.)
3. After the PR is merged on `main` cherry-pick the commits on the `maintenance/X.Y.x`
   branch (For example: from `maintenance/2.4.x` cherry-pick a commit from `main`)
4. Release a patch version

## Releasing a patch version

> We release patch version when a crash or a bug is fixed on the main branch and has been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We release patch versions when a crash or a bug is fixed on the main branch and has been
```

cherry-picked on the maintenance branch.

> 4. Check the result of `git diff vX.Y-1.Z-1 ChangeLog`. (For example:

Reviewer: Numbering is incorrect here.

Author: I removed the numbering, it's hard to update and it's ruining the diff for each change :)

   `git diff v2.3.4 ChangeLog`)
5. Install the release dependencies: `pip3 install -r requirements_test.txt`
6. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y-1.Z --no-push`. (For example:
   `tbump 2.3.5 --no-push`)
7. Check the result visually and then by triggering the "release tests" workflow in
   GitHub Actions first.
8. Push the tag.
9. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
   appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.

> 10. Move the `main` branch up to a dev version with `tbump`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. Move the `maintenance` branch up to a dev version with `tbump`:
```

Author: Just realized that we definitely don't want to make our life harder by doing that !

1. Check if the dependencies of the package are correct
2. (If you're releasing a minor (`X.Y.0`), remove the empty changelog for the last
   unreleased `X.Y-1.Z'` version.)
3. Check the result of `git diff vX.Y.Z-1 ChangeLog` or `git diff vX.Y-1.Z' ChangeLog`.
4. Install the release dependencies `pip3 install pre-commit tbump`
5. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y.Z --no-push`.
6. Check the result and push the tag.
7. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
   appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.
8. (If you just released a minor (`X.Y.0`), also release what was not yet released on
   the `X.Y-1` branch then delete it.)

## Post release

### Backport fixes from main

When a crash or a bug is fixed on the main branch, and it needs backport:

- Make sure that the changelog is for the patch version `X.Y-1.Z'`.
- (Create a `X.Y-1` branch from the `X.Y-1.0` tag if it does not already exist.)
- After the PR is merged cherry-pick the commit on the `X.Y-1` branch
- Do a release for `X.Y-1.Z`.
- Cherry-pick the version bumping commit on the main branch so the main branch has the

>   changelog for `X.Y-1.Z+1`.

Reviewer 2: I think it would be better to merge the bug fix branch into main, instead of cherry-picking a single commit.

Author: Hmm, you're right, it also fix the pre-commit issue we have with pylint.

(Consider triggering the "release tests" workflow in GitHub Actions first.)

1. Check if the dependencies of the package are correct
2. (If you're releasing a minor (`X.Y.0`), remove the empty changelog for the last
   unreleased patch version `X.Y-1.Z'`.)
3. Check the result of `git diff vX.Y.Z-1 ChangeLog` or `git diff vX.Y-1.Z' ChangeLog`.
4. Install the release dependencies `pip3 install pre-commit tbump`
5. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y.Z --no-push`.
6. Check the result and push the tag.
7. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
   appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.

> 8. (If you just released a minor (`X.Y.0`), also release what was not yet released on

Reviewer: This should probably be done before the minor is released.
So: `2.9.0` > `2.9.1` > `2.10.0`.

Author: [90d3373](https://github.com/PyCQA/astroid/pull/1438/commits/90d3373a1a6a8692896a494c8a28f5811b02e433)

   the `X.Y-1` branch then delete it.)

## Post release

### Backport fixes from main

> When a crash or a bug is fixed on the main branch, and it needs backport:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a crash or a bug is fixed on the main branch, and it needs to be backported:
```

- Make sure that the changelog is for the patch version `X.Y-1.Z'`.
- (Create a `X.Y-1` branch from the `X.Y-1.0` tag if it does not already exist.)
- After the PR is merged cherry-pick the commits on the `X.Y-1` branch
- Do a release for `X.Y-1.Z`.
- Bump `X.Y-1.Z` branch to `X.Y-1.Z+1-dev0`

> - Merge the `X.Y-1` branch on the main branch. The main branch should have the changelog

Reviewer: We should make the merge strategy explicit here.

Author: I'm not absolutely certain that there won't be conflict in the changelog that should be done manually (there's date that could be added on one side and not the other). I think it's better if the releaser think about it in case of conflict.

Author: More precisely I think about the new changelog for 2.10.2 added on the fix branch which add text very similar to the changelog for 2.11.0 and there will be new entry for 2.11 feature on the main branch.

Reviewer: Yes, but these are (again) issues that stem from whether we merge `2.10.2` into `main` anyway. You could also say that when you release `2.11` the releaser makes a manual commit which copies the `2.10.x` changelogs to `main` and then drops the `2.10` branch without any merging.
If we do want to merge there should at least be something about `git merge --no-edit --strategy=ours` in the documentation.

Author: > If we do want to merge there should at least be something about git merge --no-edit --strategy=ours in the documentation.

We're forced to merge so that ``pre-commit autoupdate`` works. The question is whether or not the merge is ``no edit`` or the one where we make sure the changelog modification are coherent.

> Yes, but these are (again) issues that stem from whether we merge 2.10.2 into main anyway. You could also say that when you release 2.11 the releaser makes a manual commit which copies the 2.10.x changelogs to main and then drops the 2.10 branch without any merging.

I think both option work and that we're well past the point of reaching this https://xkcd.com/1445/ 😄

2. Check the result (Do `git diff vX.Y.Z-1 ChangeLog` in particular).
3. Install the release dependencies `pip3 install pre-commit tbump`
4. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y.Z --no-push`.
5. Push the tag, push a `X.Y` branch
6. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
   appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.

> ## Post release

Author: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
``bash
 tbump 2.5.0-dev0 --no-tag --no-push # You can interrupt during copyrite
 git commit -am "Upgrade the version to 2.5.0-dev0 following 2.4.0 release"
``
```

> Check the result and then upgrade the main branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Move the maintenance branch up to a dev version with `tbump`:

``bash
 tbump X.Y.Z+1-dev0 --no-tag --no-push # You can interrupt during copyrite
 git commit -am "Upgrade the version to x.y.z+1-dev0 following x.y.z release"
``

For example:
``bash
 tbump 2.4.1-dev0 --no-tag --no-push # You can interrupt during copyrite
 git commit -am "Upgrade the version to 2.4.1-dev0 following 2.4.0 release"
``
```

Reviewer: Using "``" for code block because otherwise the suggestion breaks. This should be fixed manually.

> 9. Delete the `X.Y-1` branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Backporting a fix from `main` to the maintenance branch

Whenever a commit on `main` should be released in a patch release on the current maintenance branch we cherry-pick the commit from `main`.

1. After the PR is merged on `main` cherry-pick the commits on the `maintenance/X.Y.x` branch
2. Add a commit that moves the changelog entry from the version being developed on `main` to the changelog for the patch release. (For example, from `2.5.0` to `2.4.1`)
```

> ## Release a patch version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Releasing a patch version
```

> We release patch version when a crash or a bug is fixed on the main branch, and it needs
> to be backported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We release patch version when a crash or a bug is fixed on the main branch and has been cherry-picked on the maintenance branch.
```

> 1. During the merge request on main, make sure that the changelog is for the patch
>    version `X.Y-1.Z'`.
> 2. (Create a `X.Y-1` branch from the `X.Y-1.0` tag if it does not already exist.)
> 3. After the PR is merged cherry-pick the commits on the `X.Y-1` branch
> 4. Check the result of `git diff vX.Y-1.Z-1 ChangeLog`.
> 5. Install the release dependencies `pip3 install pre-commit tbump`
> 6. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y-1.Z --no-push`.
> 7. Check the result visually and then by triggering the "release tests" workflow in
>    GitHub Actions first.
> 8. Push the tag.
> 9. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
>    appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.
> 10. Move back to a dev version with `tbump`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Install the release dependencies `pip3 install pre-commit tbump`
2. Bump the version and release by using `tbump X.Y-1.Z --no-push`. (For example, `tbump 2.4.1 --no-push`
3. Check the result visually and then by triggering the "release tests" workflow in
   GitHub Actions first.
4. Push the tag.
5. Release the version on GitHub with the same name as the tag and copy and paste the
   appropriate changelog in the description. This trigger the pypi release.
6. Move up to a dev version with `tbump`:
```

```bash
tbump X.Y-1.Z+1-dev0 --no-tag --no-push # You can interrupt during copyrite
git commit -am "Upgrade the version to x.y-1.z+1-dev0 following x.y-1.z release"
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example:
``bash
tbump 2.4.2-dev0 --no-tag --no-push # You can interrupt during copyrite
git commit -am "Upgrade the version to 2.4.2-dev0 following 2.4.1 release"
``
```

> Check the result and then upgrade the `X.Y-1` branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the result and then push to the the `maintenance/X.Y.x` branch
```

> 13. Merge the `X.Y-1` branch on the main branch. The main branch should have the
>     changelog for `X.Y-1.Z+1`. This merge is required so `pre-commit autoupdate` works
>     for pylint.
> 14. Fix version conflicts properly, or bump the version to `X.Y.0-devZ` before pushing
>     on the main branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Create a new branch based on the `main` branch.
8. Merge the newly created tag into the branch: `git merge --no-edit --strategy=ours vX.Y-1.Z`. (For example: `git merge --no-edit --strategy=ours v2.4.1`.
9. Merge the changes to changelog, contributors and documentation from the maintenance branch into the branch. **Note: make sure that all changelog entries included in the patch release are removed from the changelog for the in-development version on `main`.**
10. Make a PR from the new branch on `main`.

The last steps are necessary so that `main` has access to the correct tags as well as a consolidated changelog history.
```

Author: Ha I understand why you don't want to merge the fix branch. You want to remove the patch release note from the main branch ? But we have only one documentation online, we want to have all the release notes on it for all versions in the right version. If we backport fix in the 2.10.x branch the first time something is released will be 2.10.1 or something, but it will also be included in 2.11.0. If we remove those release note it won't be in the release notes at all (the main branch being the source of truth for the online doc). Thus we can simply merge.

Reviewer: I think it will be on `main`.

What I propose is:
1) Initial PR targets `2.5.0` changelog 
_When you open the PR you cannot determine which patch release it will go in, as we are now probably releasing those more often. Therefore, you should just target the in-development version and let the patch version releaser deal with moving the changelog entry_
2) After the cherry-pick a commit is added that moves the changelog entry from `2.5.0` to `2.4.1`
3) After `2.4.1` is released a post-release PR is made to `main` which updates changelog, contributors and docs. Thereby also moving the changelog entry from `2.5.0` to `2.4.1` on `main`.

At the end the changelog entry will thus be in the version that first released it. Doing it this way makes it so that updating the changelog position becomes the responsibility of the patch version releaser (who only has to do it once) instead of the PR opener (who will have to update his PR every time a new patch release is released).
For `astroid` the difference might be quite low as we don't release patches very often, but for `pylint` not having to update all PRs after every patch release is quite useful I think.

Author: I see !

I think patch releases would still be "blocked" until we have ~~all~~ most the flying bug/crash PR done so it should not happen very often that you need to rebase and change the location in the changelog. But if it does then we don't need to do it, I'll fix it at release time like I currently do (this is what the ``git diff changelog v2.4.0`` is about, I check that all modification to the changelog are in the proper section). I'd rather have some release note to fix than all release note to fix. Also the decision to backport should be taken in the MR.  When we merge the fix branch in main, it will also fix the ``main`` branch. 

What we can do to make this process easier is to create a "To be backported" section that we then copy pasted later when releasing (Marc talked about that being done in black)

Reviewer: >  Also the decision to backport should be taken in the MR. When we merge the fix branch in main, it will also fix the `main` branch.

This is also fine with me, but note that this is a different process than the one we have been discussing so far.

As I interpreted it, we either:
Commit to `main`, cherry-pick to `maintenance`, push changelog/doc and the tag to `main` from `maintenance`
Or:
Commit to `maintenance`, merge `maintenance` in `main`. 

I thought the whole idea was not to merge `maintenance` into `main` and only push the tags into `main`. Otherwise any fix-PR can just target the `maintenance` branch, as it will eventually end up in `main`. There is no reason to cherry-pick in that case.

But okay, we have been spending way too much time discussing this and you're likely the one who has to fix any issues that come from this process. I just wanted to highlight (and potentially solve) some future issues that might arise from this not being crystal-clear. As long as you have a clear idea of how you want to approach things I guess it should be fine.

Author: I did not apply the suggestion directly in github because there was a lot to change but I applied it manually.

## Milestone handling

> We move issue that were not done in the next milestone and block release only if it's an
> issue labelled as blocker.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We move issues that were not done to the next milestone and block releases only if there are any open issues labelled as `blocker`.
```
